>>We're going to be talking about Advanced Concepts in
Using the Prototype JavaScript frame work by none other
than the absolute creator himself Sam Stephenson.
It's a great pleasure having him here and we really
appreciate him coming down from Chicago to be
with us this evening and at this time I'd like
to welcome up on stage Sam Stephenson developer
for 37signals and the creator of Prototype.
Thank you very much.
( Applause )
>>Hi I'm Sam and today I'm going to talk about prototype
and prototype is an open source JavaScript frame work
that was created a little over 2 years ago.
It's available for free, licensed under the MIT license
so you can do whatever you want with it and it's built
on code that's extracted from real world
applications that we build at 37 Signals and that team
of core contributors builds in their own
applications; so this is real code and our goal
with prototype is provide a nicer
environment for JavaScript development.
So we want to smooth out cross browser issues and
provide some things we think JavaScript has left out
and prototype is not a widget tool kit so
by widgets I don't mean Dashboard widgets.
You can certainly use prototype in your Dashboard widgets
but it doesn't provide new form controls and things
like that but rather we think that with
judicious use of HTML and CSS that combined
with prototype you can make these things much simpler
than...you can make them simpler yourself rather
than configuring someone else's prepacked widget.
So in this session I'm going to go over a couple of
APIs; I'll talk about how prototype extends JavaScript
to make it easier to use and likewise how it extends
the DOM so you can call methods on don elements
to manipulate your pages and finally I'll talk about
how we put all this together and show one technique
for delivering interface elements incrementally
using AJAX in your web applications.
So, this is how prototype fits in with the world;
it lives in the JavaScript interpreter obviously;
it's a single file so you just include with a script tag
in your web pages and there's several third party libraries
that build on top of prototype; one of those
is Scriptaculous, provides visual effects
and there's many other libraries provide behavior and
things like that and then you build your application on top
of all those and the browsers we support
in prototype officially are internet explorer
6 and above, Firefox, Safari, and Opera.
So just to get everybody on the same page I'd like to go
over the JavaScript object model and I'm going to assume
that you already have basic knowledge of Java
script; you know what the different types are;
you know how to create a 4 loop and things like that
but I want to talk specifically about the object model
so that you can understand where prototype is coming from.
So in JavaScript everything is an object; here we
have an object literal and that's just a collection
of key value pairs; so we name, Sam; age 23;
location, Chicago and we can assign that to a variable
so here we're calling that variable person...and
JavaScript lets us access properties on an object
by using the bracket notation;
so here we're getting the name.
We can also assign the name using equal operator in
conjunction with the bracket and we can get that back
and you see the value has changed and likewise we can use
the dot operator to access properties and said values;
so these are 2 ways to do the same thing...and functions
in JavaScript we can make a function called greet here
that just returns a string, takes a single argument,
a name, and returns a string using that name;
so if we call that we get our string back that says, "Hello
Sam" using person dot name, but functions are just values
in JavaScript so instead of saying function greet we can
make an anonymous function and assign that to a variable
in JavaScript; so this code is exactly the same
as what we saw before; we're just assigning it
to a variable explicitly instead of using the sugar
that JavaScript provides...and we can make methods
in JavaScript by assigning functions
to properties of an object;
so here instead of making a variable called greet
we're assigning this function to the property greet
of the person object and then when we call that
function on the person object the value this inside
of the function refers to that person object.
So here we don't have to pass any arguments to
the function, we're just calling this dot name.
And JavaScript provides ways to make object constructors
using functions; so here we've created a constructor
for person objects that takes 3 arguments, we capitalize
the name of this because that's a JavaScript convention
and what we do in this constructor, what happens is
if you use this in conjunction with the new operator
as you can see highlighted what happens is that Java
script creates a new object and then invokes this function
with this value with that new object; so here we're
assigning all of our properties from the constructor
to the new object and also assigning a function inside
of that constructor and you can see what we can do using
that constructor...but this kind of sucks because we have
to create this greet function every
time we instantiate a new person.
So JavaScript provides a solution for
that which is called the prototype property
and every function has this prototype
property and it serves as a template
for instantiating new instances of this object.
So we can assign the greet function or anything that's
going to be the same in every new instance of the object
to the prototype object and then we can
instantiate new people from the person constructor
without creating that function every time.
So this is really key; this is how prototype builds on
everything that's built into JavaScript and extends it,
and I'd like to talk about some of the
language extensions now that we provide.
So we add functions to all strings in
JavaScript; some of those are matching.
We can check to see if a sub string is included in
the receiving string; similarly we can check to see
if the string starts or ends with a given
string; these are available to all strings
if you're including prototype in your web page.
We can repeat a string any given number of times;
we can chain these things so we can repeat a string
and then truncate it; so here the string
will be no longer than 15 characters.
We can strip leading and trailing white space from a string.
We can convert plain strings into HTML quoted strings and
we can convert HTML quoted strings back into plain strings.
We can make replacements on strings; so here we're taking a
regular expression as a first argument; this is called G sub
and a lot of these functions that you see are
inspired by the Ruby programming language.
We at 37 Signals used Ruby to build all of our
applications and prototype was built to sort of mirror
that to provide...to lower the
impedance of switching between languages.
So G sub is a function that Ruby provides; we've copied that
end prototype and you can take a regular expression here;
we're looking for ING and we're just
going to replace it with an empty string
or we can get slightly more complicated;
we can capture all vowels followed
by 2 non vowel characters and we
can swap their order in a string.
The second argument to this call is prototype
template and we'll talk about that in a little bit
but here we're just swapping the order of these 2.
And G sub also takes an anonymous function for generating
replacements; so here we get the match data passed back
to the anonymous function and we can do stuff like check
to see if the match is and, turn that into an ampersand
or otherwise we'll just capitalize the word.
( Pause )
And prototype provides lots of
functions for working with arrays also.
Some of those are navigation; I don't know if
you're like me but you can access array indexes
by using the array bracket operators obviously so you
could write 1, 2, 3 bracket zero to get the first element
but I don't like these constancy in my code; I like
more expressive code, so prototype provides first
and last for getting at those very
common elements of an array.
It also provides index of which is implemented
in JavaScript 1.6 but not by every browser;
only in Firefox, I think and maybe Web Kit.
So prototype provides this for all browsers; you
can get the index of any element in an array,
shocking that that was left out, I know,
but...we can also transform arrays.
So here we have nested arrays, if we call
flatten; we get a flat array back.
If we have an array that has nulls or un-defines in it
we can call compact on it and get a copy of the array
with those removed and there's a without function that will
return a copy of the array without the value passed to it.
There's a unique function which returns
all the unique values from the array
and finally prototype provides lots
of shortcuts for working with arrays.
So here we have this greet function that we looked at
earlier and JavaScript gives you an object called arguments
and inside of each function and the arguments is
just sort of like an array that gives you access
to all the arguments you called the function with.
So we have this code, we want to get the first
argument or we want to call some other method
that prototype adds to arrays on the arguments array.
If we try to run this we get a type error because
arguments is not actually an array in JavaScript
and there's several objects like this; one is node list.
If you were to get elements by tag name
from the dot you'll get back something
that acts just like an array except it's not really.
So all these methods that prototype adds to arrays
aren't available to things like arguments and node list.
So to deal with that prototype provides dollar
A and you just wrap your array like thing,
that is anything that has a length property and can
be accessed by index and it returns a copy of it
as a real array; so here we can call
first on it; it's now a real array.
There's also dollar W which is inspired by Ruby and Pearls
percent sign W operator; basically just takes a string
and splits it on white space so it's
an easy way to create an array of words
and as you can see you can call all the prototype
methods on those arrays that are returned
because they are real arrays...and prototype provides some
object introspection methods; so a few of those are inspect
which returns a JavaScript string representation
of an object; keys which returns an array
of all the property names of an object and values which
returns the corresponding values of those keys as an array.
There's also some methods for composing objects.
Object that extend is probably the most used; it's used
heavily in prototype internally and what it does is copy all
of the keys and values from the
second object into the first object.
So here we have an object name, Sam; age 22; we have a
second object age 23; so you can see it has 2 properties
that are identically named and the values of the second
object are copied into the first and overwrite those values.
And similarly there's blend which works like extend but
it will not overwrite any properties that already exist
in the original object and an important note is that
these methods return the same object that you pass,
the first object so it does modify that
object; it doesn't return a copy of it.
And just as an example of how we use this in prototype
internally we use it to add methods in bulk to things
like array dot prototype so all those array methods
you saw earlier are added using object dot extend.
It provides a nice convenient way to do that.
( Pause )
So another module that prototype provides is inspired by
Ruby is innumerable and with innumerable you have your class
or your object constructor; you can
mix an innumerable into the prototype
and by implementing a single method you
get an entire suite of iteration functions;
so prototype adds this to a few
classes already; one of those is array.
So all of these methods are available to arrays and
we'll show you some examples of using these with arrays
but you can mix them into your own objects.
And here's the implementation of the single method that you
have to implement in your own classes; it's underscore each
and what this does is simply wraps a 4 loop; so it
takes an anonymous function, it's called interrater here
and invokes it for each element of the array.
So for these examples I'll use this variable called WWDC
which is an array created using this dollar W syntax
but it's an array of 4 words, Apple
Worldwide Developers Conference.
The keystone of innumerable is each
and this is how you invoke each.
You pass it in anonymous function and that function
is invoked for each element of the innumerable;
so here we would get 4 pop up dialogs
saying each word in the innumerable;
so we'd see Apple Worldwide Developers and Conference.
And this anonymous function also has an optional index
parameter so if you want to get the index you can just add
on a second parameter and then our alerts would
say Apple, Zero, Worldwide One, and so on.
And it also provides control flow mechanism so
sometimes say we want to break out of a loop
but we can't use the JavaScript break
command inside of an anonymous function;
so what we have to do here is throw a
special exception prototype gives you;
this object called dollar break
and this will let you break out.
So here we say if index is greater than 2 throw a
break; so here we would only see the first 3 alerts
and you can do this in any innumerable function not
just each...but where the real power comes in is
when you can transform arrays or innumerable.
So one way to do that is with Map and here in
this case the anonymous function is just going
to return the first character of each element in the
innumerable and then we get back as a return value
of Map an array of all those returned values; so here we get
the first letter of each element or we can also do something
like get the length of every word...and it turns out doing
stuff like that, accessing a property for each element
of an innumerable is pretty common; so prototype
provides a shortcut for doing that, it's called pluck
and pluck is just Map that accesses each elements property.
So here we're getting the length of each
element in a more convenient fashion.
We don't have to create this anonymous function.
( Pause )
And we can also call methods on these so here
we're truncating each element to a size of 4
and again like the pluck this is a pretty
common thing to do on a collection of elements.
So prototype gives you invoke and invoke takes a
string which is the name of the method you want to call
on each element and you can optionally
pass any other arguments;
you would pass to that method and
you'll get the values back.
Innumerable lets you search through innumerable
objects pretty easily; find will return the first value
in an innumerable that matches or rather for
which the anonymous function returns true.
So the first word with length 10 in this
example is developers and we can use find all
to get all of those matching the given condition.
So all of the words of lengths 10 returns an array
developers and conference and we can also use grep
to take an irregular expression and find all
elements that match that regular expression.
So here anything with an L followed by a
vowel...that would be Apple and Developers.
Finally there's max and min; so you return some
value, some computed value in your anonymous function
and prototype gets you the max or the min value.
( Pause )
There's some functions for matching elements in
innumerables so if you want to check to see if an array
or any innumerable includes certain element pass
it to include and you get true or false back.
( Pause )
We can also check to see whether all
elements match a certain condition;
so if we want to see if all elements are longer than
4 characters, that's true but if we check to see
if all elements are longer than 5 characters, that's
false and similarly there's any which returns true if any
of the elements match the given condition.
So here there is an element to match in which the
first character is a W but there's not an element
in which the first character is an X. There's some sorting
capabilities built into innumerable so you can sort
by a given anonymous call back here so we're looking
for, in this case, we want to sort by word length;
turns out the elements are already sorted by
word length here but we can flip that around
and sort by the inverse word length
and we'll get our elements back
in reverse order...or we can do something silly
like pass map dot random as the interrater
and get the elements back in random order.
You can compose things very easily
using innumerable so the zip method
in innumerable takes 2 innumerables and combines them.
So here we're going to pluck the length of each element of
the innumerable; we've got 1 array for that so that's 5, 9,
10, 10 and then we're going to take that and
zip it back into the original innumerable;
so now we have a new array returned in which each
element is an array containing the original value
and the length of that value.
And there's inject which is sort of like
the Swiss army knife of innumerable.
It takes an initial value, in this case we're
passing zero and then that value is passed,
the anonymous function is invoked for each element of
the innumerable and sum here will start out as zero
and then for each successive invocation of the anonymous
function will be the return value, the previous invocation.
So here we're accumulating a value; we're summing
up the lengths of all the words and we get 34.
You can do lots of stuff with inject;
this is just a simple example.
So you get all this stuff for free if you implement a
single method and we saw arrays implementation was 2 lines
but you can do this in your own classes and get
all this stuff for free and one such case of doing
that is prototypes object range internally.
So object range lets you specify a start and
end value and it'll give you an innumerable
that lets you access all the values in between.
So here we're saying new object range from
1 to 10 and then we're going to convert it
to array and 2 arrays provided by innumerable.
So we get an array of all the values from
1 to 10...and we can also just call inject
on that without converting it to an array first.
So here we're summing up all the values from
1 to 100...we can also use it with strings,
so here we're getting every letter
from A to Z. You can implement yourself
in your own types just a single method again that
returns the next value and you can use your own objects
with object range...and the preferred way to use object
range is with dollar R because it's much shorter.
So here this is the same thing as saying new
object range but we're just saying dollar R one ten
and here we're mapping each value in
the range to that number of asterisks.
And prototype provides a simple way of doing
string interpolation with the template object.
So here we're creating a new template, we pass it a string
and we've got these funny little hash brace things
and inside of those we put a name; name, age, and location
in this case and these refer to properties that are going
to be substituted back into the string when evaluated.
So we can use it like this.
We create a template and then we call evaluate on it and
we can pass it any object; we can pass it an object literal
if we want, such as we're doing in
this case and then we get a string back
with those values substituted in...and we can call
the same template object on any number of objects.
So here we're using a different object literal
and we're getting a different value back...and
finally prototype provides a little wrapper
around the constructor pattern we saw earlier and
it looks like this; it's called class dot create
and basically let's you move your constructor
behavior into the constructors prototype.
So you can move all that behavior
into a function called initialize
and then what class dot create does is returns a new
function that when instantiated with a new operator calls
that objects initialized method; so it's just a, again,
just a way to lower impedence when you're switching back
and forth between languages like
we often do in web programming.
It's not intended to be a full implementation of class
based programming but it's a very simple way to...not have
to think about what you're doing to much.
So now I want to talk about how prototype extends a DOM
We just talked about how it extends JavaScript itself
and we what we do in JavaScript most of the time is work
with DOMe elements so it's nice to add lots of things
that we feel that DOM left out
and that's what prototype does.
So the W3C DOM level 2 HTML specification defines all of
these different objects for referring to the different tags
in HTML and in a perfect world it would be really,
really nice if we could just take these objects,
access their prototype property and add methods to
them but unfortunately it's not a perfect world.
We have to deal with internet explorer.
( Laughter )
So as you can see here internet explorer doesn't let us
modify these at all; it doesn't even give us access to them.
Opera gives us access to HTML element dot
prototype so we can add methods to all elements
but we can't add methods to individual tags.
So we can't say like, "I want a
method on a P tag or a form tag."
Firefox does give us access to everything.
Safari that ships with Tiger only gives us access
to all elements; so it's better than nothing
but it could be better; fortunately it's fixed in Leopard.
Safari 3, Web Kit we have access to
prototypes of all the individual tags.
So prototypes solution to this problem of not being
able to add methods by default is to introduce the idea
of the extended element and here's
an example of how we might do that.
You'd call document dot get element by ID to get some
DOM element and we want to call it prototype method on it
but if we're using internet explorer we would
get a type error because that method won't exist.
So we can call element dot extend on that element and
then if we try to call that method we'll get a value back
and what element dot extend does
is similar to object dot extend.
It'll copy all of the methods that
prototype catalogs internally
for these objects and return the element extended.
Now if you're only developing for Firefox and
Safari 3 you don't have to worry about this stuff.
All elements are automatically extended for you
but...most of the time you need a cross browser solution;
so what you do in this case is make sure every DOM element
you use in prototype passes through prototype somehow,
passes through one of our query functions and you'll
always get an extended element back from prototype.
So you never need to call element extend yourself basically.
So, one of the keystones of prototype itself is the
dollar function and this let's us...this is a shortcut
for get element by ID essentially but again
it always returns an extended element.
So here we're getting, we can see this DOM tree on the left;
here we're getting the DIV with ID article 4 or the element
with ID comment 1...but the really nice thing about
dollar is that you can pass it a DOM object as well.
So if you don't know what, if you want to write functions
that take either a string or a DOM object all you need
to do is call dollar on that argument and it
doesn't matter whether someone passes a DOM element
or a string you'll always get an element back.
We can also query by CSS3 selector
and to do that we use dollar, dollar.
So dollar is for a single element and
dollar, dollar is for multiple elements.
So a simple CSS selector would just be a tag name, in this
case dollar, dollar, DIV will give us all the DIV tags
or DIV dot content will get those with class name content.
We can also do some advanced queries like
finding all DIVs with class name comment
who have an immediate child that's an age 3 with
class name author or something like this where we say,
"All P tags that are the second child
of the parent element," there's only one
of those here and these work in all browsers.
So IE barely supports CSS1 but you can use CSS3 selectors
anywhere you can run prototype and in Firefox, Opera,
and Web Kit these CSS3 selectors are compiled into
X path expressions; so they're really, really fast,
especially in Web Kit; they're incredibly
fast...but sometimes that's not enough.
Sometimes we have a reference to an element but we want
to get another element in relation to that element;
so to do that prototype provides a whole suite
of functions, again; one of those is down.
If you call down with no arguments you
get the first child of the function
and if you've ever programmed a DOM before you
know you get these things called text nodes,
if you use the built in DOM manipulation
functions and they're a pain in the ass.
You usually never want text nodes,
you just want the DOM elements.
So prototype only gives you DOM elements.
You don't have to worry about text nodes.
So here you won't get a white space text
node; you'll just get the first element,
that's the child of the DIV with ID article 4.
Similarly there is up which returns a parent
element and these also take CSS3 selectors;
so you can say up body dot article to get the body if
it has class name article and these are nice to use
in conditionals; so if you want to say for instance
"Am I on a page in which the body has class foo"
and in this case it doesn't so it returns undefined.
You can use this in a conditional because
undefined works like false and any other value works
like true or any DOM element works like true.
So you could say "if comment one up body dot
foo" and then do something based on that.
And we can combine dollar, dollar with innumerable
to get some pretty powerful constructs;
so here's one example of that.
We're getting all DIV elements with class name
content and then we're invoking previous on that
so we're getting all the previous elements from DIVs
with class name content or we can get all H2 elements
and get all the next DIVs from those H2s.
There's functions for manipulating class names in
prototype; so the DOM gives you a single string to work with
but that really sucks when you have
multiple class names on a single element.
So prototype gives you functions for working with those
and one of those is has class name which returns true
or false based on whether or not
an element has a given class name.
You can add a class name; if that class name
is already there it doesn't get repeated;
so here we're adding a class name to this element.
We can toggle class names; so this
element already has a class name content.
If we call toggle on it with content that
class name goes away; otherwise it's added
and we can also remove class names explicitly.
And I found that I don't want to give a number but a good
bit of my DOM manipulation is simply adding and removing
and checking to see whether or not elements have class
names; so this is very powerful because you can move a lot
of your logic into CSS just by doing
this; so these are nice tools to have.
We can check to see whether or not elements are visible;
this is done with the simple convention and that's whether
or not the element has an inline style property;
the inline display style property specifically.
So here we have this element and we
want to see whether it's visible or not
and it is because it doesn't have an inline style property.
If we call hide on it prototype is
going to set that inline style property
so this is what the element would look like...and
then if we call visible on that we get false back
and we can also show it again and
then that style property goes away.
There's also some functions for working with
element attributes and read attribute is a wrapper
around the DOMs built in get attribute function
that works around some cross browser issues;
again in IE which often returns utterly
insane values for certain attributes
but here we're just showing how you can
read an attribute, get the value back.
You can also use these because these are real functions
in IE again get attribute is not a real function
so you can't use it in conjunction with
invoke; it's some sort of native function;
anyway you can use read attribute with invoke.
So here we're getting all the A elements
and getting their HREF values.
( Pause )
And this also works with XHTML bullion values so
XHTML likes us to say disabled equals disabled.
So prototype works with that; you can read attribute on
some bullion and you'll get null back if it doesn't exist
which would be like false in a conditional.
If you use write attribute the corresponding
function to set a bullion value we can pass true
and you can see that's automatically
converted into the right value for HTML.
If we call read attribute on that again we get a
string back and that string will evaluate to true;
so you can again use these in conditionals
very simply and again we can write values back;
so if we write false for bullion that value just goes away.
There's some functions for working with elements
styles and these will actually fall back to CSS.
They'll read inline styles and styles that you
set with CSS and a style sheet or a style tag;
so here we've set font size on H2s and if we find an H2
called get style on that we get the right value back.
Similarly there's set style which takes an object
collection of key value properties so we can set any number
of styles all at once or we can just set
a single one; here we're setting the width
to 350 pixels...and finally there's some functions for
working with DOM content and we like to do this with HTML.
So prototype lets you put HTML anywhere in the DOM,
very easily, especially relative to given elements.
So here we're going to find this H2 that says
comment title and we're going to call update on it
and what update does is replaces the elements in your HTML.
So here we're just replacing that with a string
fragment of HTML that inserts a span tag and you can see
when this is called this is what happens.
( Pause )
You can also insert HTML...HTML fragments so here we have
an A tag followed by a DR in a string and if we call insert
on this element it's going to go at the bottom
but we can also say that we want it to go
at the top...or we can put it before or after an element
and this is where before and after go and these all work
with HTML...and finally we can replace elements outright.
So instead of just replacing their content, we actually
remove the element from the DOM and insert a new fragment
of HTML generated from the string in place.
So that's what that looks like...and we can
also create elements very easily with prototype.
So we can use a new element constructor; we give it a tag
name and we can optionally give it any attributes we want
to set on that tag and then we can use real DOM
elements with all of these functions we showed earlier.
So here's an example of using it with insert instead
of specifying a string we are just using real HTML,
a real DOM element here...and there's the image.
Finally you can add your own methods to
elements in prototype and it's very easy to do.
So here's an example of adding 2 methods to all elements,
dim and brighten, and these will just change the opacity
and you can see an example of how you might call those in
an element and you can also add methods to individual tags.
So here's an example of how we might a method called disable
with to all input tags and you might call that something
like this, get a form, go down and find the first submit
button in that form and disable it with some string.
So you can do this all yourself, add your own
application specific methods and it's very simple to do.
So now I'm going to talk about how you can put
all this stuff together and deliver your interface
in your web application incrementally using AJAX...and
this is just one technique for doing AJAX stuff.
There's many, many techniques but this is a simple one
that I found works really, really well because in my day
to day work I really don't like to write JavaScript.
I prefer to write Ruby.
So I try to keep JavaScript as dumb as possible and
fortunately our prototype helped me out with that.
So AJAX, the term stands for a synchronies
JavaScript in XML and the XML presumably comes
from the XML HTTP request object around which
this is based but it's a pretty poor name
because we can send any data along; it's
just a wrap around each HTTP request.
So prototype likes to think of this as a synchronies Java
script end HTML and I'll explain what I mean in a little bit
but first I'd like to show you how you
can make a simple request in prototype;
so we instantiate the AJAX dot request constructor, pass it
a URL and you can pass it a set of options; so we can say,
"I want this to go out as a get request."
By default it's a post and you can
say "When this request completes,
say synchronies I want to just show a
pop up dialog with the return value."
So this is pretty basic stuff.
I'm not going to go over the whole
AJAX request and update or APIs.
There's a lot of stuff you can do but I want to
focus specifically on what prototype provides
which is automatic JavaScript evaluation and
this is all provided if you use default options
and configure your serve side language to
deliver things in the proper way...and if you do
that you can just make a simple AJAX request
to a URL, that would look something like this,
again using all of the default options and if your
response has a content type of text/JavaScript
and contains JavaScript code when that response comes
back AJAX dot request will automatically evaluate
that job de-script in that context of the window.
So this is powerful stuff; this lets us
generate JavaScript programmatically;
as you can see this stuff would be pretty easy to
generate in any language; it's just...you know,
you're working with elements and
you're calling methods on them.
Here we're removing class name; we're replacing an element
in HTML with a string of HTML; we might use Scriptaculous
to highlight that element and we can do any number of
things...but sometimes you need to pass some data along
with the request and to do that we need
to serialize a form more often than not.
So you can do that with prototype
pretty easily, make a new AJAX request
and use a parameters option and then serialize some forms.
So here we have a form with ID form and we're
just going to call this serialize method on it
and here's some sample data you might
get back; it's just your in coded string
and amazingly JavaScript doesn't provide a way
to get that string from a form but prototype does
and that's...that's okay but we can make this better.
We can just fill this information into our form tag itself.
So if we have our form set up with an action, a method
parameter, and an on submit handler we can just say
that when this form is submitted we want it to go over AJAX
and we do that by calling the request method on a form;
this is added to all extended form elements in prototype
and this is the same as the example we saw before...this,
you can just write it like this, right in your
form tag and this also lets you degrade gracefully;
so if the user doesn't have Java
script enabled this is just going to go
out as a regular HTTP request, a page load rather.
So, in the past...well let me just say that when we're
creating interface elements on the web typically we're going
to have common operations and that's create, read, update,
and destroy and there's HTTP verb equivalence of all
of these methods; post, get, put, and delete but in the past
we really haven't had access to those put and delete verbs
and we've only been able to make post request
by submitting forms but XML HTTP changes that;
prototype solves some cross browser compatibility issues
with that also but now what it amounts to is we have acces
to all these verbs and so we can use these
in our application to simplify our code.
So I'm going to talk about a specific interface element;
this one is from an application we released a few months ago
at 37 Signals called High Rise which is a shared
contact manager and the element that I'm going to talk
about is the task widget, so to speak, and this is what
the default view looks like; this is in the side bar
of every page in High Rise and you can click
this button and get a nice little form here
for adding task...and one way we could write this
is by writing a whole lot of JavaScript for each
of the different states of the form building these elements
by creating the DOM elements internally with a bunch
of JavaScript but really we have to render this stuff
anyway as HTML because they're showing up on page loads.
So we already have this server side code that generates
the form and we don't really want to duplicate this stuff;
so prototype is a strong adherent to the dry mantra,
don't repeat yourself, and one of those ways is
by embracing enter HTML, the update method that you saw
earlier that prototype provides and what we do is we,
at least in Rales, an easy way to generate all this
stuff on the server side using partials and partials are
like little pieces of HTML and the entire
application is built around using these partials.
So we can send these down the wire over
XML HTTP request and in conjunction
with the 4 ACTP verbs we get a restful
approach to creating interface elements.
So I'm just going to show you sort
of how we put that together.
So there's many different states of this
control; one of them is, well you can set a time,
so when we click this set a time link what happens
internally, this is all very dumb JavaScript;
we're just setting the value of a hidden field and then
we're making an XML HTTP request and this is going to post
to task/new and you can think of this as a resource.
So you might want to think of this a blank sheet of
paper or a form that's printed out on a piece of paper
and we're going to post some data back to that
and we're going to say, "Let's change your state."
So what happens is we get some JavaScript back; it's
got the content type of text/JavaScript and it's going
to re-render the form and that's it; that's
all you have to do in the JavaScript side.
The JavaScript is just serving as
glue to put all this stuff together.
So here we've added, we've set this hidden form value and
now the Ruby knows to generate...a little time widget.
Similarly we can change when this task is due; as
soon as we make a change to this select element,
we post again to task/new and we get a little
calendar back; so we're changing the states.
We don't have any JavaScript here that renders a calendar;
this is all done on the server side and it's very,
very simple to do in Ruby and you're
probably more comfortable with doing this
on your own server side languages
rather than writing JavaScript.
So we think this is a good way to do it.
The HTML coming back down, the form gets re-rendered
and whenever you click on...well when we change months,
for example, we're just going to make another request;
this is setting a form value, re-serializing the form,
making that an XML HTTP request and we get the next
month back...and if we click on any of those dates,
what we're going to do is set it a hidden field and
we'll talk about that in a second but let's go back
and look at how this looks when we actually add a task.
So if we type something into this description field here
and we click the add task button we're going to make a post
to task; now here we're posting to a different
resource because we're not just re-generating the form;
we're actually submitting this and saying,
"I want you to go in and create a new task."
So our resource here is a collection of all tasks.
The verb is post and what we're doing is saying,
"Take this data that we're serializing from this form,
post it to this resource, and give me a new task back" and
on our server side we take that and we just close the form,
we send some JavaScript back down the wire
to close the form, essentially hiding it,
and re-rendering this containing element to show the new
tasks and again we have to do this on every page load
because these task are shown on each page.
So we already have Ruby code for generating this list
of tasks in HTML and we don't want to duplicate it;
so by using enter HTML, by using
prototypes update method and combining
that with a restful approach we make it really,
really simple to only write your code once.
If we mouse over this element...we get this little nub end
on the left and this gives us a delete and a change link
and the way this works is by a little bit of JavaScript
that looks to see what element you're mousing over
and adds a class name to it and then this nubiness is always
visible in the HTML but we use CSS to hide or show it.
So there's an example of how you can use the
add, remove class name stuff in prototype
to really simply modify your page
and separate your behavior into CSS.
So if we were to click the delete link you would
actually make and XML HTTP request using the delete verb
to the resource that we just added here and
the URL to that resource would be task/4.
Four is just some ID but it's a unique URL representing
that single task; I'm not actually going to delete it.
I'm going to show you what it looks
like when you go to edit a task.
So if we click on this change link we're going to make
a get request because we're not modifying anything here;
we just want to get a resource and
that resource is the edit screen.
You can think of it as a screen or form or piece of paper or
whatever but it's a resource belonging to that single task
and when we do that we add a class name right after we
make the request to the containing element called busy
and that shows a little throbber so we get a progress
indicator; we do this on all AJAX request actually
but I'm just showing you here, showing another example
of how you can use class names to separate out behavior
like that; so we're showing a throbber and when that
response comes back we get our form rendered again;
again this is all rendered with Ruby, inserted
right into the DOM using prototypes update method
and this is our edit resource and it looks
like the form we saw earlier except we're going
to be changing existing object.
So we can change the due date again; if we do
that we're making a post to...we're posting back
to the same edit screen so we're not posting
like we did before to the new tasks resource;
we're posting to the edit resource...we get a
calendar...and if we click on a specific date,
this is setting a hidden field in the form and
then if we were to submit that form it's going
to serialize all the values of the form including that
hidden field and the date changes and then it's reinserted
into the DOM; this is all re-rendered again using
that code we've already written on the server side.
So the JavaScript again is very, very dumb.
All it's doing is gluing this stuff together and it
makes it really, really easy to write this stuff.
Finally let's look at what happens when you complete a task.
Well we just have a little form in there and actually we
don't have a form; we're just passing a parameter along;
so we pass a parameter along with our AJAX request that
tells it the task is completed; we add a class name, busy,
and again we're re-using that class name that we used to
show the throbber earlier but this time we're just going
to show it struck out and then the response comes
back and after 5 seconds that element is faded out.
So that's an example of how you can use all this stuff
in your applications; again there's many ways to do it
but I find the enter HTML method is a simple way to reuse
code and to not have to think much about JavaScript at all
and you can find all this stuff and more documented
on the prototype web site at prototypejs.org.